to that and talking about how you can
get started in OpenGL and exactly what
Apple's OpenGL implementation how it's
made up first of all this is going a
high-level overview of OpenGL we're
going to talk about a little bit of lamp
applicable entation and the set up for
an introduced OpenGL and talk about how
that works and then we're example
implementation and give a little bit of
how to to get you're going to lead into
the next session first we'll talk about
what is OpenGL exactly how does it fit
in what does it do and for some people
kind of heard OpenGL term bounced around
a lot which we talked about it we said
this is a great thing but how is it a
great thing for you what can you do with
it and we'll talk about our
implementation details we'll talk about
using OpenGL and we'll give you some
references to get started and to get you
on your way they'll give you some really
good source coding some the
documentation for it first OpenGL really
is just a software interface for
graphics hardware it drills down and
allows you to really get at the meat of
the hardware and with all the research
we're doing these days in the 3d
hardware the companies are doing it
really allows you a really good way of
getting high performance graphics to the
screen its platform agnostic so a lot of
you who have things that may run on unix
or may run on windows or may run on the
mac OS OS 9 or OS 10 can use the same
open GL graphics code for both and have
that stay the same across multiple
multiple platform for your application
so it solves your development problems
that way it doesn't mean don't write
windowing code for every single
application and write the specific
graphics engine for every different
platform you're on it's also a
synchronous this is a key to
understanding OpenGL we have a graphics
engine and you have your application
you're submitting commands for the graph
extension this kind of comes back from
when it was originally from from the FBI
design that you could have the graphics
you have a client-server kind of
operation that you would not have in
what you'd say a pc today we've carried
that over and everyone to carry that
over when they build OpenGL and what
that does is mean that your commands are
submitted and then you swap the buffers
and it basically execute
batch of command and displays you
whatever your your image becomes on the
screen it's also based on geometric
primitives instead of some higher-level
languages that might be PDF based like
quartz or they might have a file
handling capability doesn't have that
what it has basically it has the basic
points lines and polygons and you build
them from the bottom kind of up and real
important to understanding OpenGL is it
it's a state machine when what state you
said it in is always a state it's going
to be in if you turn texturing on it's
going to stay on until you turn it off
if text rings off initially if you try
and text your polygon you're not gonna
get any texture you're probably anyone
will get a white polygon cuz it's not
going to apply a texture until you turn
the texturing on and there's lots of
examples of that and a lot of new OpenGL
program which myself included have been
bitten by that many times that's about
it let's move on so we talked about it
just as a state machine as I said this
is a key to understanding OpenGL and
successful development with OpenGL by
understanding it's a state machine you
under you can understand why things
happen in your application and as I said
with texturing you can add almost
anything in an OpenGL including the Mo's
not just the switch kind of mode but
including some of the drawing modes are
again states and you can change
drastically the behaviors application by
setting simple states also state changes
can be expensive sometimes they're not
but a lot of cases they can be if for
example you design an engine to draw
something on the screen that every frame
goes through and sets every single state
that you need set in some cases you can
really be seeing some long paths through
our drivers and through OpenGL but
making your application run
significantly slower than it could run
if you actually expect the state once
and then think about when you need to
change it so for example if there's only
two things in your scene one it's extra
math and what it's not texture map drawl
everything is texture maps and then
Darrell everything it's not texting maps
that switch once rather than on a per
polygon or a poor coin basis so also we
talked about setting in getting states
it's really key when you want to know
what its stay on a set of state or how
to get it stays you can use GL enable
and disable
therefore throughout the API you can use
them for almost every state
documentation covers the litany of
states that you can set also there is a
geo is enabled and a GL get key here
also sometimes that has to query the
hardware and to do that it since it is
an asynchronous operation you can have a
command that changes of state somewhere
in your pipeline if you call a GL get
they hate is texturing enabled what
happens is in it may have to wait for
the whole command pipeline to execute
the query the hardware to say mi in that
state get the command back so as you can
see that could be an awesome an
expensive thing so that's not a shortcut
it's not just not a state that is always
saved off in the software it really ties
the software opengl drivers and the
hardware are tied together very closely
and GL push on tribute and pop attribute
the reason i mention these is sometimes
if you want to change a lot of states
you have a pile of things are changing
you may want to use push on screen and
pop out treats a lot of times as we
faster to do that than it is to save all
your states or check your state's enable
your state's disable your state's one at
that time so let's talk a little bit
about the OpenGL pipeline real simply
the OpenGL plug is a really high level
overview of the pipeline I say that you
might want to go to the references and
there's a lot of in the specification
and all the references a lot of more
in-depth in-depth section on the OpenGL
pipeline so I'm not going to really go
deep into this but it gives you an idea
of how it works and so this is all your
data comes into this pipeline and first
thing that vertex is come into so if you
have a vertex you have a point in space
it comes in there and basically when the
vertex comes in it applies
transformation that puts that vertex
somewhere in space it says okay the
model transformation it's over here by
the podium and then it takes
transformations of view transformation
based because I'm looking at it from
this perspective and so that sets off
the relationship between the point and
the eye and also the projection
transformation which actually projects
that point from your 3d space into your
2d flat screen that all happens in the
vertex operation then we clip the thing
prospective provides v4 train
information happen so we actually
transform it into what size of you pour
it is you'll see one of the applications
I'll demo later that you can drag the
window and make it larger that's of you
translate that and just resetting the
viewport to a size prospective divided
basically scales things via your Z or
how far away it is making smaller far
away and closer and closer it can make
and when things are closer makes them
larger obviously one key here is the
perspective divide is based on
information you supply to opengl it's
not based on opengl always does this
it's a 3d application it has to look
exactly this way for example one thing
we'll talk about later in the week is
using opengl for like not a game or not
a immersive 3d application you can say
hey I want this to be orthographic I
don't want that perspective I want
everything to be directly parallel
projection and I'm going to make
everything the same size no matter how
far away it is and you can do that if
you're marrying a cad program for
example so these are things that it does
in general but depending on how its set
up in what state status in maybe
depending on how actually it carries out
these and it calls either it can do back
face culling so if you have my
proverbial cube and i don't want to show
the back faces of that cube because
maybe it's transparent it will look at
the polygons and determined based on
whether it's clockwise or
counterclockwise would polygons to throw
away that may be facing away from you
now we talk about pixel operations pixel
operations are parallel to the vertex
operations if you put a texture in there
or you put a bitmap into opengl they go
to the pixel part of the pipeline and
they basically pixel to unpack and
sorted into a format that opengl sand
understand that's real important because
when we talk about texturing later
opengl expects with certain types of
formats and you need to be all supplied
this pipe before my graphics for it to
expect and you'll see what we have some
good news in that area as i get through
the presentation here pixel master
process and their past is past in your
texture memory or to the raster rights
to be drawn so basically it hands it off
the texture memory here you go here's
your form your bits bits in pixels in
form in the proper format and then when
it's when the
texturing instructions come in they can
pull that texture out and ink texture to
the screen rasterization rasterization
basically takes your geometry and pixels
and conversing the fragments fragments
is something that represents basically
one pixel on the screen as you notice at
the bottom of this slide I have XYZ wrgb
st r and q so those are basically that's
a point of space so it has an x y and z
value you may say hey didn't you just
say that was already you know we're
already converted to 2d we didn't we do
this perspective divide thing why do I
have a Z well you can do def sorting
with this fragment so when if you have
depth when it turns on turns into a
fragment says hey am I in front of
everything else I'm Iceni full eat
opaque and I'm in front of everything
else this is a fragment should actually
be this fragment instead of the fragment
behind it RGB is obvious str and q are
using texture mapping but basically so
this converts everything to the single
pixel on the screen and allows it to
then be drawn to the screen and lastly
we do fragment operations which is
texturing and fog so it says hey I got
this colored pixel is it may be white
maybe grain to be blue but now I want to
find what piece of a texture Maps
corresponds to that will single pixel
and I color that pixel width of my piece
of text match if we're doing text string
it fogs applied if clockwise the
appropriate fog and it can do scissor
checkings is coming down alfo stencil
buffer or depth tests are all done in
here so this is going talk about deaf
textme of multiple fragments with
different depth it's going to take the
front one but one couldn't have analysis
value so you may have you may have some
different interactions there but this is
where it's done okay what does open to
y'all not have this is what people don't
understand a lot opengl it doesn't have
a built-in windowing system it doesn't
know about math windows doesn't know
about Windows Windows it doesn't know
about unis windows it doesn't know how
to draw things to the screen so on the
math we have a GL we have n SGL we have
glutton we have NS open opengl view
these are all ways to set up in an
environment that opengl can use and use
that to draw into a GL is fairly simple
to work with because it can be used for
with OS 9 + OS 10 n stl can be on 10
glutes on OS 9 and os
10 and NS OpenGL view is also on OS 10
there are different ways to work with it
the NFC l and the NSO pgl view are both
object oriented is OpenGL view is kind
of interesting because you basically can
do everything you instantiate an end to
OpenGL view object in it already sets up
your OpenGL for you you're ready to go
it also doesn't have input methods input
methods are oh s specific thing so for
example if you after a mac OS a pair of
a normal keystroke so those kind of
things it open shelves just a graphics
API it does not have any kind of input
if using glut off obviously also without
plus a little bit about later glut has
its own keyboard in your face and mouth
interface it also does not have file
handling there's one of things that
opens y'all being a lower level API
rather than a high level API it doesn't
have the handling of an importer for
certain kind of file if you build a
model in my on you export it doesn't
have intrinsically a way to read that
Maya model in and would display that you
have to work you have to put that
together or do some stamps code is
already created it also does not have
like I said that high level modeling
doesn't many tools built in to do
high-level modeling or understand high
level models high level models have a
certain way of texture mapping it also
can have a certain way of handling a
hierarchical structure like a like a
skeleton and that's not built in you can
decide how to do that and that's
something for you to do in your
application or you don't have to if you
don't have high level models you want to
display some small things or some
primitive zor do you use them the
primitive drawing you don't have to
build a complete handling system for
every file out there okay now we're
gonna talk about APIs implementation
first thing I'll do is go quick overview
of what hardware we have out there now I
probably up some new Mac developers out
here but we have some old faithful few
real review for you guys then I'll talk
about some frame or coerce 9 + OS 10
I'll talk about what extensions were
supporting I'll talk a little bit about
glut and I'll talk about a GL and setup
GL so current Hardware it's obviously
the ibook the imac the powerbook and
power
the ibook is the first part of standard
but the key here if you're working with
opengl is what kind of graphics hard
roads are going to support as a rage
mobility graphic cross which is
basically like a rage pro it has 4 mega
vrm and a gp2x so what does that tell
you the for Meg of vram says about how
much limitation you have on texturing
and buffering when you're working with
opengl it's not critical to understand
but something you do want to understand
is the fact that if you're doing opengl
you have a front window you have a
screen that takes up a certain amount of
vram you have a back buffer for your
opengl window that takes a free ram and
you also have a depth buffer which may
take up the ramp and any textures you
upload also going to be in the vram so
thinking about what the configurations
are shipping to what kind of vram is
kind of critical and also that i would
say testing on multiple systems is also
critical for opengl i'll tell you a
little story hero i came in to do my
demo I brought my powerbook game works
great I demos run great they're really
simple shouldn't be any big deal posted
up here turned on video mirroring forgot
that the vram was split between the
mirrored and my powerbook display and
when I am when I loaded my texture it
was doing texture paging so that's
something that's a good reason to go
chest your app on your mobile platform
to make sure you're running and makes
you understand the constraints of
running your app I'm asked as a rage 128
VR graphics boss is a really great thing
to work with I mean if you have a imac
you can surely do open to opengl
development it has really good support
for OpenGL and is one of our you know
the rate which ways art or top process
that we're going to support as far as
feature set so you're going to get all
the features there 8 mega vram that's
good gp2x also powerbook 400 500
megahertz powerbooks ati rage mobility
128 graphic controller 8 mega vram and
82 x one thing that i have to say is
that this is one of the kind of unsung
heroes of mine of our product line for
me because I'm like this is great you
can get this even to opengl working i
mean i used to develop opengl and i run
on a rage 2 which is you like 200 x 100
window and looking at do this bit right
so this is great to have this
you can develop full speed applications
you can build about full screen
applications you can work on your
powerbook wherever you are without
having to sacrifice the graphics
processing the power mask the rage 128
pro graphics processor up to 16 mega VMM
in ATP 2x they're also third-party
hardware and supported formats 3dfx both
have good offerings 3d effects is
obviously an ounce full map supporting
they're going to be rolling out some
really high powered cars and so you know
we're looking also so you can add for
people to add on cards you get more
performance even than we may supply
initially okay let's talk about how
opengl structured in the OS so for mac
OS 9 implementation framework we have an
application we have a little setup code
the reason I segment those out it's
because as I said OpenGL does not have a
windowing system it does not know all
about how to draw to a window does not
know what your windows are like so the
setup code is what handles a slice a
setup I say constructing your window and
telling OpenGL where this is where it's
going to draw two ways to do setups in
mac OS 9 through the glutes which I'll
glut handles a setup for you basically
you say hey this is my window here so
here's what I want and it builds it for
you or a GL which you build your window
and you say I want a certain pixel
format here's my drawable that window
and I'm passed to you and you're going
to take care of that you're going to use
that for me once you get past that you
can see that then you're actually can
talk to OpenGL directly an application
for glut application can actually do
some things in glut to produce output
but also it can go directly to OpenGL
once you have the setup done and so we
didn't you go through OpenGL make all
the GL calls once you have the setup
done and then that goes passes through
to the drivers which handle actually
drew rasterizing and drawing things to
the screen
oh it sends a little more complicated OS
10 there's a lot of different ways to
set up but if you notice that the
application still is using glut or is
using opengl that hasn't changed you can
pick a lot of different options for
setting up but in reality you're opengl
your application code doesn't change i
have a number of example of been working
on over the past few weeks for some of
the demos and just for some live stuff
on OS 10 and I didn't change any money
with my OpenGL code none zero I mean all
I did was change my setup code which is
really a good story because it means you
can move your applications that may be
online forward and you can create
applications of run on 10 run on nine
run on Windows run on unix without
having to change your code every for
everything a block on specific you've
got to change the most setup stuff we
talked about some of these vienes OpenGL
view is available in cocoa we also have
got which is gonna be available and the
glut this is available will be available
on OS 10 and OS 9 and there are
different implementations but they
should be a code compatible glut if you
don't know is a basically a free not
really distributable as far as better
ways say that it is not given to you
free we it's not our application mark
chill Guardsmen who used to work at SGI
wrote it and he distributes it freely
but it's not he still owns the source
code you're not free to go and change it
and call it yours and resell it or
something like that NSEL is also their
blood isn't playing on top of it and NFC
all open view calls into NSEL ADL's
their work works basically the same on
10 and 9 they call into the low-level
core graphics GL so cgl and that goes to
the colonel into the drivers so the key
here is to understand is there's lots
more ways to get out open gel key of a
cocoa application no problem set up
OpenGL through cocoa through nsdl off
you go Dave spring or summer toss in the
next tacos will show you some
demonstrations are using NS GL and show
you how easy that can be ok this is what
we have for extensions right now a
couple apple extensions it may improve
some rendering from transformed hint
compiled vertex array for speed quake
uses that multi-textured places ask you
a lot of people use multi texture
texture texture working and sexy and V
add well I can tell you right now is
that we've had a lot of developers and
say I need this I need pack pixels I
need to sell their format and then
actually let me back up a little bit
extensions OpenGL those videos you're
not familiar if I may have moved a
little bit too fast here with opengl
opengl has a has a particular graphics
API to find it has a message by
providing extensions that extend that
api for example with with the multi
texture it allows you to do multi
texturing layering more than one texture
on top of each other in OpenGL and
passing that to the OpenGL pipeline
rather than having to do in software
where you might blend things together
and then pass it as a single texture so
there's I mean there's a litany of
extension there's a lot of extensions
out there we pick some of those some of
those to implement some of them are
vendor specific vendor specific so they
might be an SGI only thing or and some
of more XP type which are multi-vendor
obviously we have to vendor specific
ones here and the rest of multi-vendor
there's a lot of other extensions that
people say can handle textures is better
can do some some more confined of
combining textures and we haven't self
to this point having supporters that
what i can say is that basically as of
i'll tell you the availability money
gets i'll tell you the building right
now OS 9 the ADC seating in the in very
shortly we're going to have these
extensions available on a feed for
opengl 12 which will be a 1 122
compliant opengl one of the keys here is
our software implementation and our the
API you can write to is 12 to compliance
with opengl there's two pieces is a
driver piece and there's the our
implementation piece as drivers come up
to speed with 122 you get a full OpenGL
122 implementation but the key here is
you can get these extensions very
shortly proceeding and then after that
they'll be in our next OS rev1 when we
bring that out next OpenGL rep also for
OS 10 the same set of taxes will be
available the same time extension will
be available for OS 10 very shortly so
for developers who want to look for use
these things that they'll be available
very shortly and
pay attention to the OpenGL list and
also in the ADC seating and they should
be available for download for
installation on to DP for onto Mac OS 9
we're looking for Apple pack pixels and
some people who are familiar with
tackling why is it Apple pack pixels
we're extending a little bit to
recognize the kind of pixel formats we
need but it should be the same as normal
pack pixels of a transpose matrix we
Nate ABG are so we can do different
pixel ordering pixel color ordering and
a whole bunch of others we may even add
to this if we see that there are some
that the developers are looking for so
you know this is this design good news
for developers we can really get extend
your ability to develop on the platform
ok let's talk about glut a little bit
got is GL utility tool kit as I said it
was written by Mark kill guard of SGI
written written in a number of years ago
it's available as source code through a
number of different vendors we give it
out with our SDK is also as source code
and when we first brought the OpenGL
speak a 10 out we brought gloat over to
the math which is on Windows and union
actually ported that in this 36 format
which has some things that lacked
reported that to the mac with the 10 SDK
shortly we'll be releasing this a 37
version of glatt but includes a couple
new things included game game mode or
game glut which basically allows you to
full screen mode on on glut and also
some contextual menu support which is a
normal way for a lot to operate we're
finishing this up right now and this
should be sealed off and should be out
with our next SDK released shortly some
bug fixes we're going on nine or better
child window handling and just from
general bug fixes 37 it should will be
available for Mac OS 9 Mac OS 10 and i
asked i have to actually think that is
this correct but the 37 api maybe- game
mode should be on the DP for CD and
that's correct so through so glad 37 is
on DP for and all the exams a
significant amount of examples that we
have gone with it will be there also so
what is why do we do use glutton I would
not I would honestly say glad is
probably not something you would want to
use for a shipping application if you
want to build a little
over to OpenGL experiment with it if you
want to check out all kind of a
rendering technique or do something do
some work on an engine that you may want
to put into glatt that might be a good
framework just to work with it it
provides an API or a platform agnostic a
GUI environment I'll saying GUI that a
little bit of a GUI environment
basically gives us a platform set out of
the setup for the window handle some
input handles keyboard handles and mouse
events handles menus and those kind of
things and your code can open window to
math to you next without really any
changes the AGM set up GL I alluded to
this a little bit earlier we talked
about on a GL and setup GL Oh GL is
Apple GL it's basically our interface to
get to the GL this is the thing that
handles Windows setup it handles handles
base with all the pixel format that
handles some utility and some error
codes AGL is available in mac OS x it's
also available on mac OS 10 for carbon
and you can write basically the same
code in kit mac OS 9 in mac OS 10 and
i've been working on some is working
some stuff that basically compiled one
binary runs on 9 runs on ten runs on OS
9 as an OS non-carbon and the stems are
11 set of code and the same code runs on
ten wasn't that difficult to do they're
talking about you know a few weeks to
carbonize it it took me two or three
days to do it may be him probably an
afternoon probably really for four or
five hours at one sitting spread across
three days and what instead of GL if
you're not familiar with OpenGL on the
math and you're not pay attention to our
needs to our OS OpenGL newsgroup you
probably haven't heard of it it's
actually a piece of sample code that you
can have all the source to what I try to
do is in our sample code we have a
section we call more is better and
there's more network setup there's a
more files that some of our other
engineers have written and what they've
done is basically trying to accomplish a
real significant piece of the
functionality that you will need into a
piece of sample code instead of having a
sample code that shows okay here's how
to draw a square in OpenGL instead of
just doing the absolute minimum trying
to do better error checking better
better error returns tried to add in
actually handling uh you know your vram
requirements so you can send a different
food memory requirements handle
fullscreen fullscreen window switching
so one call heat you a full screen
contacts you can call us you can destroy
that context and call one call again and
get you a window to the same thing so
it's not limited to just doing one thing
so it's it I think it's a reasonable
thing to start with it gives you a good
either a good base of source code or you
can use it directly setup GL is not go
away sign currently I'd say carbon
swimming that's actually not correct as
of when this presentation was written it
was carbon soon now it is carbonized and
it should be out this week on on the a
on the MCM farts no se a DCC to be on
the sample code site you should have a
carbon version of it you can run in
carbon and run on mac OS 10 DB four and
in and in OS 9 so HDL we're going to
talk a little bit more about AGL a
little bit more about the specifics of a
GL Oh GL handles we're talk about the
basics then it handles pixel formats
handles contact Straubel swapping ponts
and errors so what are all other things
first the basics as we talked about
before handle set up and it'll SWAT and
set up a nail swap and improvised
utility function if you're familiar with
windows at all you'll see the enet GL
drawable which is defined as a GL and
that's the main construct that you're
going to pass the GL and say this is
what you're going to draw on its
equivalents basically 2 a.c window
pointer which is also equivalent on
Windows to an HTC so that's kind of the
equivalent see if they're coming from
wgl the key here is that people
sometimes try and get away away from
miss it well I can need to see graph
pointer I can just point to my money on
my off screen or i can point this piece
of memory i can point to whatever i can
grab and grab a seat pointer on the
screen and just draw to that a key a
real key for GL here as it uses the
information in the window pointer to
figure out what piece of hardware you're
rendering on if you have two cars when
3dfx one's apple and you drag your
window from one monitor to the other
using a gel correctly if you have a
window pointer you can fairly easily do
that and it'll render on one
render on the other no problem if you
pass it a see graph pointer probably
best cases you start on your main
monitor to render correctly you can move
it off and they not render anything if
you start on you have your window on
your secondary monitor you pass the
seagrass pointer it'll probably draw on
the upper right corner of your main
monitor just over everything else so the
key here is used a window the window
information important you can't
substitute a seagrass pointer in this
case in HCL context and a gel context
basically maintains an AGL state and a
GL stay with that I so basically you can
switch between contacts now switch
between one rendering state to another
rendering state that's the same as h GL
RC i love this one man says it's great
we have a nice AGL context and they have
capital h GL RC so what is in atl
physical format we say isn't that like
what's on the screen well not quite an
age L pixel format may be a misnomer a
gel pixel format actually is a request
for a drawing mode it has some more
things in it you can tell it you know
rgba you can say you want to double
buffered you can say you want to back
buffer or against our depth buffer you
can say how deep the depth buffer is a
lot of responsive occation to the Ajo
pixel and it's not just saying I want 20
you know pretty two-bit 16-bit eight
bits whatever it's more than that we'll
go through that in a minute but its
equivalent to the pixel format
descriptor I like that so moving on
pixel format ok so two bit main things
we're going to use is a GL choose pixel
format in a jail destroyed pistol format
and please if you're doing GL check for
errors check for a GL errors it's
reasonable that one that if you give it
a pixel format that's not supported on a
card or in software or on this other
monitor you're using or whatever it may
sail and if you go off and marry your
merry way and instead of your context
and draw your GL you're wondering why
you're not getting anything or why your
programs crashing it's because you could
have not returned to valid pixel format
says hey I can't do this so you have a
said it has to be span what is actually
just a shlee say well in this case is
telling a GL you want a red green blue
and alpha buffer you want it to be
accelerated you want to be double
buffered and then the AGL nun says you
terminate
that that set of attributes you'll do
this this for every kind of pixel format
you work with you can add a double back
buffer into that or depth buffer you add
that you know and after that you specify
the depth town named controls your back
buffer I'm sorry how many bits your back
buffer is what are some other things you
can specify you can specify or you can
ask for how many bits for each component
you want and one of the keys here is
that is the ADL accelerated in that
string it y'all accelerated I think I've
written near me I didn't write i can't
remember Ashley there is it a actually
there is there's a QA about ATL 2 64
format which I would recommend anyone
who's looking to opengl so it's a read
and look at there's some caveats on how
this works and it's probably more in
depth and I can go into it in this
setting but realize that it may not be
obvious how it's choosing pics c'mon
it's very logical and it's very easy to
figure out once you know it but it may
not be obvious first looking at it for
example what it tries to do is try to
match across any possible display that
you pass it this pixel format so if i
have four displays and i say i want this
fixed will form anywhere but having two
of those displays or not on an
accelerated card at all i've spoken
cards out of the junk bin put them in
there it'll fail it'll say hey I can't
accelerate this cuz I these two don't
have GL renders on it so that's what I'm
supposed to know why is the family I
have my rage 128 I want it that's where
the window is and so there's some
nuances there as far as selecting
displays and what you want to do if you
want to win it to be draggable you want
to see you want to make sure you do a
truce pixel format for all the displays
you could drag it across if you want to
win or not be draggable you want to
probably limited to the display that
you're actually on so that's the nuances
in hl2 pixel format but then it's real
simple you call a chill choose pixel
format you pass in hg g you tell us how
many displays that you're passing it or
list of hdds and you pass it the
attributes so this case we're gonna say
i'm on this HDD handle I'm sorry all of
the age I that's my shorthand handle to
handle to is used by sir GD handle and I
have one monitor and I want to run on
that monitor and here's my attributes
when you're done with it you call HDL
destroyed pixel format when you're done
means when you're done creating it you
don't need to keep it around
until you're finished with GL you can
actually create it a signatory of
contacts that's the drawable and off you
go and destroy it right right then so
context next step in the process you
have a pixel format you said I want to
do RGB I want and have a double buffered
I want to have a depth buffer to settle
right now I have my pixel format for
those displays now you want to create a
GL context you're drawing which saved
case we can encapsulate the GL state you
can have more than one of these by the
way it doesn't mean you guys have one of
everything you can have as many of you
really want to work with i recommend
depending on what you do use go
carefully at the difference between the
digital format of context in a drawable
you may want to clear one pixel format
create a context and create a couple
drawables with a saint Owen to its it to
that pixel for my contacts or if you
have maybe a window that you don't need
any depth buffer I mean you have a
different pixel format for that without
a desk saucer and a context and it
encapsulates that but if you have
everything that needs the same thing
everything needs a depth buffer
everything needs rgba everything needs
to be accelerated accuse me you can use
one contacts and create multiple
drawable select context but this is
simple this is basically it pass it in a
pixel format it has been null and use
create a context and so pretty simple to
get the context now check your errors
and when you're done with it the actual
on destroy it the key also is sex
another thing is that current context if
you have multiple contexts and you want
to do that car and contacting you want
to draw them more than one context one
of the things that that I also find that
people miss is a GL update context and
it's not on the slide but I'll go over
it a little bit if you're moving your
window sizing your window showing your
window or hiding your window you
definitely want to do a GL update
contacts it tell it let the AGL tell
OpenGL how to reset the drawable and a
reallocate buffers is necessary for
examples you sighs a window we have to
reallocate the back buffer there we have
to make sure that we have a new back
buffer this the right size of the window
so we're not if not a good thing to do
these updates without or do updates to
your window without actually telling in
the same thing if you move from one
render to another we need to tell GL to
not use the rage 128 and to use the
voodoo so that you have on this other
monitor
okay drawable real simple set rawal you
basically also draw was going to do is
going to attach a drawable to a context
you say i want to draw into this window
basically and you can have five windows
or you can have for example the patan
standard cad program has three views top
left front and the end a projection view
what you could do is you could set up
those three are orthographic those you
set those three up that basically you
have you know they're they're parallel
projections you're going to do one
context of those three and you have all
of those parallel projections with three
separate drawables you catch one you
move your move your camera you draw that
one attach the other move your camera
draw that one move your camera draw that
one then what you're going to do is you
have a second context for the the one
that has the projective perspective
projection and you're in set that up as
a prospectus perspective and you have
that its own contact own drawable and
you basically switch to that context
that's current context draw that one and
off you go calling swap buffers have
when you're finished drawing for each
one of them okay for SWA SWA buffers it
basically tells OpenGL I'm done
submitting stuff to you go ahead and
draw so it's kind of the go ahead and
take off and let your engine chew on
this data see past 80 past a day pass
data call swap offers it sends it all
off the card and that's it absolutely
not correct if they send it off to the
car but it actually starts executing
that actual person I shall frame the
drall to the screen real simple is a a
jail swap buffets with the context one
note here is it does inclusively call GL
flush which means basically terminates
that scene for rendering and says go
ahead and some finite time the feature I
know this will Ashley execute a GL use
font AGL use fine as a real nice thing
to have a line first book the GL while
ago and look at AGL use fonts and you
know I'm the point can't quite
understand I can't get it and then I
thought it I fooled around oh this is
really easy this is like super simple
and this is great if I can put all kinds
of data in my stuff I can
go down render them on and put in my
frame rate I can put out what it's doing
I can put up state information I can do
all this with by doing putting text on
the screen in OpenGL without having to
you know draw text to the screen which
I'll talk a little bit about later but
basically you don't want to try and draw
text and OpenGL windows open GL doesn't
know you're drawing checks and there's
no idea and so it'll it'll drawl right
over it or good text withdrawal over the
OpenGL it's not designed to work in that
fashion but atl you want I get an F num
for Monaco for example and then I'm
going to go use a create a deal unsigned
integer which glu inch list base and
that's the base of my base of a list of
basically textures i'm going to have
they're called gem lift 256 which
generates 256 slots in that list I then
call use font with my contact my fine
idea the norm normal 9.0 200 0 is being
a lift 256 which is the end of the list
and the list base and what does that do
that creates that basically takes that
fun and draws it into all this hole
faucet list so now I can go and I can
say use my nice little function here
which i use call list with with the
string length into the list base and
basically what i can do is i can wear
the basis of the c-string and i can put
a/c string to the display I set a
position ladies this call this function
tell what the spring is with a
null-terminated string and use and what
with the spring and then it's linked to
the string and it just right to text out
to the screen no problem so it's really
easy to put text to the screen you can
use printf you can use our s perhaps to
format whatever you want and you sort it
out you can put out errors if you want
to the screen so it's real it real
simple to do atl errors this is the
differentiating from the GL error but a
clr has a silly error page you'll get
error in a gel error string real simple
you get to you and we're going to do is
going to get the error you're going to
pass it in if it's not no arrow to an
atl air spring and actually put some
spring in a parsed format what i eat a
lot of time to do is you do it to a
debug string and so drops into debugger
and then I'll conditional eyes that in a
debug mode or not in debug mode so i
actually don't get the debug strings on
a final bill but in like i always want
to be a
I always want atl to tell me if this
problems creating something when I'm
doing my non debug build so there you go
for a GL error it's pretty simple to use
and it putting in part it right there we
give you the voice of parse it they set
up GL back to that sample code these
sample code it's about five files six
files and if you can pull apart you can
tweak it around you do whatever you want
with it it you know it's provided as is
i think it does it does do a pretty good
service you can just get it it's just
one call to set up one call to take it
down and off you go on your GL you don't
have to do anything else i ported a
couple screensavers from one of the
folks who do windows 3d screen savers
and i ported literally one of them in
like 30 minutes using setup GL i should
play something moved a couple things
around so the wgl calls and that was it
and i was done so it works pretty well
um if you part of it was originally used
for quake 3 and this is based on the
quake 3 code that was work we work with
them for enhance when windows in full
screen the full screen is currently mac
OS 9 only and I'll and I'll go through
that a little bit right now now full
screen on 10 is being implemented right
now or is it is in development right now
and we're going to provide that shortly
vs feeding as a patch to 10 so for the
we don't we don't have a way of getting
full screen for opengl at this time
that's something i would love to have
had in GP for but you know we have to
close the close the lid at some point
and get someone to you so you can be
developing with it today so but expect
that really shortly I can't go obviously
i can't give you definite times but I'll
alert people on the OpenGL mailing list
when it's available and so they can get
it and they get downloaded and
immediately after it's available i'll
extend this to use the full screen
section if you want to find more about
fullscreen fullscreen applications we
have our games on 10 session tomorrow
that i believe it's tomorrow that will
talk about some of the the option to
know extensible screen game in hand of
multiple contacts as a pause and resume
in it and a sources available sample
code at that URL it's really simple
though and developer done a blog com /
sample code and we have a real good
hierarchy in the sample code it's really
easy to find so use go to 3d graphics
and you'll see any of our sample code
for 3d graphics there
so let's talk about using OpenGL I'll go
through a whole section about how the
basics to set up and use OpenGL is what
how to set it up how did some basic
transformations how to do some say using
what the basic primitives are talk about
alpha blending and talk about texture
mapping a little bit okay so let's look
at this code here this is through a GL
the first thing we're going to do is
we're going to set up a geologic routes
basically the same thing we did before a
GL rgba double buffered and none so this
is saying I want a double bucket context
so if slops actually going to draw into
the bath and swap of the front a gba
obviously red green blue and alpha
channel for it and depending on what my
resolution is depending on actually what
the target is this does not set your
display resolution or have anything to
do with that kind of thing it just tells
OpenGL how you want to draw pixel format
and contacts all all set those variables
up I'll choose a pixel format in this
case is a different example of choose
books or format in this case i passed an
online account 20 what happens here is
it looks across every monitor that
you're looking at and it says can every
monitor that is attached to system or
every video card every graphic display
device satisfy that pixel format if it
can't this may fail so realize that's
when the accelerated thing comes in
again if you realize that setting a GL
accelerator means that everything it
looks at has to be accelerated for it to
succeed it's one thing to think about
I'll call a GL create context passing
the format in that I got out of the
pixel format obviously there's a there's
no error checking included here but I
would definitely say given the given the
code for the error checking it's pretty
simple to write in the AGL get air or AG
el hierro strength and then i set the
drawable basically i'm going to cast the
p window to an AGL drawable again I
can't stress enough that you want to use
a window not a seagrass pointer for this
pretty simple setup GL like I said
simplifies your coding or you can use it
rip it apart even pull pieces out of it
you look at it as an example and I
really don't care if whatever works best
for you and whatever helps you in your
development efforts in this case I call
pre-flight GL basically
if I expand this a little bit the gia
the weight set of GL work is a GL info
which is the structure yourself the
structure is pretty simple to wit it's a
height do I want full screen do I have
to have this width and height this
otherwise set of GL will pick out a
window that kind of fits into your into
your screen what works with that works
there you kind of high pass in the GL
full screw the GL info full screen to
preflight GLS to know whether I want to
use draw sprocket in this case to do
full screen or not you know if I don't
know all it checks for the existence of
GL if I do it checks for also draw
sprocket exists and we call that then I
called build GL in this case I'm going
to pass a pointer to a drawable a
pointer to a contacts and appoint to a
DSP contacts which may be nullify if I
don't have a draw sprocket if I don't on
full screen that could come back to null
and I can pass the number of device so
which screen on one on and basically
passed my information in there and
inside that information is the pixel
format that scripture like we saw before
and that's one call boom you're done and
out of that you get your drawable in
your context which is what you need to
draw for GL destroy to yell real simple
path the same information in it takes
care of trudging everything down for you
and closing everything out ok let's move
on to transformation it's kind of a
tough slide to go through and there's a
lot of information on there and this is
absolutely scratching the surface here
one thing I look back and the years ago
when i was in college i said man i
really wish i had studied more paid more
attention in linear algebra if your work
if you want to work in GL and you want
to do more than then you're fairly
simple applications i would really look
to make sure your linear algebra and
your matrix handling is good there's a
lot of simple things you can do without
it but if we really want to for example
if you want to write the next quake
definitely want to understand how
matrices work and how rotations work and
help me help some offsets work and how
how that interact with each other
presents them that's a key to actually
being effective in opengl programming
but there are some simplifications to
know there are some things you can do
that don't require the super knowledge
of linear algebra GL you look at i
didn't mention glu yet
glu is not a GL call to glu call it's a
little bit higher level with every
OpenGL implementation is also a glu the
Glu it does some nice things for you and
kind of build higher level instructions
that rely on the GL instructions in this
case you tell us where your eye is XYZ
until we're the center of your display
asst XYZ and you tell it up XYZ to what
what the up Vector is so you can say I'm
a zero I want to look at 1010 and you
know 1000 negative Kensi and you can
tell what your up vector is in your
right you're rolling you don't have to
figure out what I okay that's the right
hand rule and I'm looking here and I'm
moving around here did I tell it where
you want tell what you want to look at
and I'll set up and that sets up the
Model View transformation it tell you
it's basically sets as a basis for where
your eye is relative to the weird center
your screen is so if you just draw
something now it'll draw relative to
Center relative to zero in the screen
which you can even move back and look at
the zero if you wanted to also for
modeling that's moving your eye for
modeling to move your model you
basically want to set up whatever you do
whether it's with the cube of square or
whether it's done and then Sarge and
quake or whether it's a mile based model
what you're going to do is you're going
to use translate rotate and scale what
that's going to do is you going to
choose they do exactly they say one
translates one rotates once scales and
they can move your model around you want
to apply this all the vertex in your
model obviously and you want to realize
that what order you do things in when
your translate first and then rotate has
different things and if you rotate then
translate we can easily see that you
have a square in front of you where you
have whatever a car in front of you and
you rotate and then you translate in
that and local coordinates it may
translate differently than translating
and then rotating and so that's
something to look at and some of the
open field references talked about that
talked about how to think about that in
a way that works for people who have not
done a lot of open jail program I mean
it's not too bad you work through it
closely it's pretty easy to do once you
kind of get the hang of it one of the
keys here it's one of the funny things I
think every OpenGL programmer realizes
there's more ways than OpenGL to get a
black screen than anything else in the
entire world everyone who's working
OpenGL goes okay I got this figured out
and I got it outside
there and I checked it and I have my
graph paper and I'm sat in my office and
stared at my thing and I got this
rolling okay run black let me look at
something I look at my mind glu look at
well so how do you know if could kill
you look after all I mean you know your
model could be off and you know in the
next building over as far as you know I
mean so there is my recommendation for
all of it is too there's a ton of
examples out there for OpenGL a lot of
blood examples it does tons of things
able to show you some examples and some
of the stuff he's done and there is like
five hundred examples in in our SDK use
them build off of them look at how they
do things moving small steps didn't
don't decide like I did the other day
that you want to display a movie on a
surface that's rotating and deforming
and you have your I move around at one
time I lads us all at one time I don't
want to add all this in one team pieces
so you know work slowly look at look at
your transformations carefully and learn
what they're doing look at the different
effects of the different transformations
and you'll and you'll move forward
quickly if you sit there and decide you
want to write from crash you want to
figure it all out I guarantee that
you'll building a lot of lock screen for
projection kill you perspective is
really nice field of view I and aspect
ratio in a near and far plane pretty
simple I mean it just basically did
using go from the fisheye lens to the
telephoto lens and you know what how
squished it is how round it is I'm it's
like aspect it's probably going to be
your screen aspect but you can do
special effects so that you can squish
things but changing aspect ratios and
those kind of things it also tells you
how powerful a lot of the matrices are
in OpenGL because it allows you to
actually change some things that you did
you have a square window does not mean
you have to have a square projection it
can squish it it can stretch it they can
do whatever you want you'll also is a
example of how to do an orthographic
projection thus you can do a parallel
projection in its own that's wise
instead of a frustum specifies a box
angio viewport allows you to set the the
XY location and the width and height of
your drawable inside of your actual
rendering area inside the viewport so
that's something nice to do also you can
move it around you move windows
off there's other nuances there as far
as like using a buffer wreck and AGL but
is you port allows you to do the basic
TL setup basic primitive points line
triangle squads bygones real simple I
say this is actually pulled out of a
good Z draw a square code which you'll
see later in its in its full
wonderfulness set up a color call three
vertices and end actually that's all as
a piece of the square that draws a base
of the square or a face and you can do
them and it can be complicated for
example the Maya demo you saw they did
they don't use the OpenGL internal
nerves kind of calculation they
tessellate everything and they turn
everything in the tri scripts so they
have they basically their code you're
going to see GNC of GL triangles or
general Jodl tries prime Stephanie
receive three vertices which color with
the moment with was a texture
coordinates or whatever but they're
basically doing the same thing it's just
a low-level drawing formative alpha
blending alpha Bunny is real simple
simple transparency and you what you do
is get the enable button a blend mode
it's again a state machine you can
normally it's not enabled from your
navel blend mode you can then set your
blend function which basically tells
what the foreground and what the
background does and then you basically
set instead of your color which you
notice before I had set a color this
time I set up an alpha value in that
color so I'll use four components and
last being the alpha value in the Alpha
value says this is 50% transparent I do
the same thing I did before so we got ok
let me show two demos real quick and
this is these are I have to say the idea
what these demos let's make something
really simple to show some of the things
that OpenGL can do so so this is not
supposed to be quake this is not
supposed to be you know the next great
amp because I'm what we kind of get is
the spinning square you know this is a
good place to start you're looking at
something that really works you get you
get a square and you can go from there
so that's that's what spinning square so
that's upsetting with note with no
blending or alpha on why don't we turn
on
blending in this case basically I pulled
that I pulled the code that you saw on
the other monitor out of that and
basically I just do an alpha blend with
a square I mean it's not great but it
shows the effect and you can do some
cool things with it so we'll go back to
the texture mapping slide now then go
back to the PowerPoint
so in reality I mean flat objects
objects that have smooth shading don't
really aren't really exciting as you saw
in the demo this morning as in the
keynote it's really a lot more exciting
lenient with the texture mapping on
there when you got a scene that it looks
or looks well life like pops out at you
that's when it gets real interesting so
step steps and texture mapping how do
you text your map the texture mapping is
a little bit strange when you first look
at on the mac did you kind of stand up
that you supply this buffer to opengl
and use that for a texture be kind of
like well how do i get the buffer into
the mac and all you tell opengl to use
it and what's the difference between on
kijiji world and a buffer so basically
you needed to create and draw your
texture and set your text for parameters
and then you enable text streams enable
text strings easy that's basically home
from a code down there i'll show you
code on the next page to create a text
or an open jail the simplest thing is to
draw anything you can into a G world so
for example the use Quicktime i love
using quicktime and you can use read any
file format you basically want to save
things as and you read it into a girolle
then you would do what's called
swiveling texture and swiveling pixels
you have to actually put the pixels in
an order right now until when with the
pack official some that is one reason
pack pixels is a really good thing to
have but right now you have to move
those pixels into a buffer that has them
in order that opengl expects so for
example most textures you may want rgba
if you say your textures rgba you set up
a buffer that just has a width and
height x three components x 24 bits
sighs buffer of rgba and then your
extract component from your g world and
put them into that box it's not really
difficult to do there is sample code i'm
not sure if it's up yet but it will be
up this week that tells you how to do
that and it's basically a 10-1015 line
function it's pretty simple to do and
it's not that slow either you can do
some good stuff with it if you really
wanted to be aggressive you can go and
use a velocity engine and optimize that
using the commute instructions to blast
pixels in but for me I'm just picked the
right leg pixels out and put them in the
right order and move them over and it
works pretty well so um the first part
is that correct text parameters
basically I'm these are kind of some
standard settings for texture parameters
I
up some filtering for it so it knows how
to filter textures and then here's
here's the actual meat of it we enable
texturing state machine again make sure
we've been able to detect string GL text
image 2d and this actually this is
probably easier to look at in the
documentation that it is on the screen
Liz but the key here is basically i have
three components i passed the width and
the height and i tell us to know its RGB
it's a 2d texture unsigned bites and I
passes the buffer there is a pointer to
my buffer which I've extracted from my G
world put to put in the right format and
that's the texture so that tells you
what the texture is and can then you go
the same thing I did before which is
basically say hey I got to school with
the face of the square make a quad but
also added the injeel text coordinate
and then it jail text corn is pretty
simple texture coordinates are set up to
be 0 to 1 so if i have a texture that's
512 by 512 it's 0 to 1 it's hard texture
coordinates so assuming now mapping it
to one single polygon it's real simple
to set up when you're mapping to
multiple polygons it can be not more
complicated one thing you should look at
is another glu function is a GL you
texten function it's fairly complicated
function probably beyond the scope of
this talk here but it's something to
look at look at some of the sample codes
it uses it to this really can be a
interesting function for texture mapping
on more complicated surfaces that you
don't want to calculate every single
texture coordinate yourself Oh what else
will say one thing another note on
textures as texture should be powers of
two our implementation right now
specifies that texture needs to be power
of two and people will say why do I get
white textures and so I talked about
quick time frame an image handling I
talked to the pixels must be school
Switzerland argb to RGB until pack pixel
format is actually out and alpha channel
is indeterminate equipped rom one key
there is a quick trawl does not support
maintaining alpha channels thus for
quick draw you need to put your own
alfin there is cases where you can read
it in using quicktime and immediately
blast it out with the alpha but yeah I'd
be real careful you're getting doing the
right thing white textures what could
things going to do if you're out of
system memory
I think people see that was quick if you
don't have enough system memory there
you run it may run out of texture memory
that's in the system that we need to
sort expert into you can increase the
vram or the virtual memory sorry
increase the virtual memory on this and
that will solve that problem it may not
ever access that extra nganimate just
sit there but it needs somewhere to
store it so it can restore it if the
card has to purge it you can have a text
remote era for example you didn't turn
texturing on so that didn't work or that
was a lot of time actually or in this
case that was referring to if you have
255 by 255 it's going to say i can't i
can't texture this thing i don't know
how to read the texture in so it's gonna
fail reading any get a nice boy texture
so what kind of texture demo i can have
and this is again really simple one of
the one of the things that i want the
stress about these demos you can switch
to the demo man thank you is that these
are all built with the carbonized
version of setup GL runs on that on 9
and 10 so i can run this application on
nine or 10 and that it means is design
what heroes make it real simple but
using setup GL for both it simplifies to
X amount of your applications carbon
compliance subscale will allow you
Carmen compliance and so I'll run this
so this makes was released a little bit
more exciting pulling the Maya face from
what we had earlier J putting a marble
texture on and this literally the code
you saw i added was faced with the code
I have to ask I mean really going from
something that's really nothing just was
a flat shaded square to something that's
actually interesting to look at or
reasonably interesting to look at it's
not hard also you have we as a
reflection the other production was just
using an alpha blending real real simple
stuff but there's something that that
it's not hard to do if you haven't used
OpenGL is pretty easy to get to this
point can go back to PowerPoint so we
going through that the last thing I'll
cover some references big time if you're
looking at OpenGL get the red book the
red book is the OpenGL programming guide
also if you want a reference manual I
couldn't go back and forth if you can
download the specification from ww
OpenGL org or you can actually buy the
blue book and by that as a reference
depending on what you like is I think
that's the OpenGL specs in PDF format
and yeah if you want to print it I think
you have to have a postscript level two
printer to actually print it to the
prism of the font handling but as far as
the the programming guide is really
critical to have and it actually goes
through kind of step by step through all
the pieces of OpenGL goes through a lot
of examples go through a lot of kind of
comp and moldings and show you how
things work without just descending
ascending function value where the
reference manual is just a function
references in alphabetical order the
whole book is just function reference so
they're both critical to have in
different ways online WWE OpenGL or
great place to go a lot of developer
documentation a lot of white papers
tremendous amount of things you can find
there if you look around people ask any
questions sometime and I go there and I
searched around a little bit and I'll
find the answer to our question that I
may not have known just like somebody
else's someone wrote mark chill guard
had some great papers out there Michael
goals have some great stuff out there
steve baker st great stuff out there
about some of I think mark kill guard
has the 16 common OpenGL mistakes and
almost everyone makes it's a good thing
to read when you're getting going with
OpenGL and also list on apple.com easy
thing to do is just go to list on apple
com search search for OpenGL and you
through the OpenGL list subscribe to
that asked questions we want the
engineers monitor a list we try and
answer a lot of questions there and
that's a really good thing to get
information in an apple OpenGL and i'll
be in it when we have a speeds ready
they'll be announced there when the full
screen support is out there that'll be
announced they're also so it's good
things to look for okay I think that's
about all I have oh ki roadmap OpenGL
Mac os10 Dave Springer and talk about
that that'll go into a lot more depth
than I did and I'll talk about a OS 10
specific OpenGL OpenGL beyond game talks
about using OpenGL for non gaming
applications we're talking about
handling multiple windows how to text
your map and moving onto a surface and
things you can do with it you don't have
to use OpenGL you can use OpenGL for
like a 2d sprite engine that would gets
you a lot of special effects for free if
your rotation gets you translucent so
you can see all these things for free
and you can take advantage to GL
hardware arbonne geotech lead was going
to talk about advanced optimization
techniques following that and then we'll
have the feedback form after the after
lunch after
and I welcome you all the please come to
the feedback form tell us what we're
doing right tell us what we're doing
wrong and give us suggestions so that we
can move forward okay question and
answer and actually this lies I want to
bring Bob beretta up on stage who is one
of our OpenGL engineers easily the Guru
so when you ask the hard questions he's
gonna answer it so I'm Bob so if you
have a question please come up to the
mics and ask questions